BACKGROUN OF THE TESTMetagenomic studies of microbial communities sample a fraction of the total genomic content (sampling depth), which are then sequenced at a certain sequencing depth. Both sampling depth and sequencing depth can vary several orders of magnitude between samples. As absolute microbial counts (abundances) are normally not known, and measurements depend on sampling and sequencing depths, community compositions are represented using relative abundances. Since relative abundances are constrained (they sum to 1 in a given community), they are susceptible to compositional effects, where an increase in relative abundance of one component leads to a compositional decrease in the relative abundance of other components. Differential analysis based on relative abundances thus needs careful interpretation as compositional effect can introduce spurious differences in relative abundances while the absolute abundances are not different. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTIONWe developed a simple method that enabled us to evaluate if our results were biologically real or a consequence of studying compositional data (relative abundances). The method is a simple algorithm that tests if the fold change of each taxon varies between time points when we exclude each of the other taxa from the relative abundance table. The algorithm proceeds, first, leaving one taxon out of the relative abundances table. Secondly, it renormalizes the table by dividing the relative abundances by the total sum of relative abundance to make all the taxa relative abundances sum to 1 again. Lastly, it calculates the fold change (log2) between time points and performs a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (one can change the code if another test is desired; notice that this test is a non parametric test for paired samples) for each taxon. We repeated this process for all the taxa considered and evaluated whether our results (fold change of microbes) were spurious or not using the least significant P-value calculated for each taxon. 